Why this transition is a pivotal moment:
Moving from manual data entry to pandas and DataFrame is a turning point because we move from
writing low-level, step-by-step logic to leveraging a high-level data processing engine.

Without use of pandas, code would be written in lengthy, so many lines of code would be needed to handlle missing values,
data types,column names and also large datasets and this would cause a lot of mess. A simple example like below;
file = open("data.csv", "r")
lines = file.readlines()

data = []
for line in lines:
    values = line.strip().split(",")
    data.append(values)

But after Pandas was introduced, many lines of code would be replaced by only one line e.g:
df = pd.read_csv("data.csv")
instantly getting a structured dataset (DataFrame) ready for analysis.

THREE key “automatic” features Pandas performs:
  1.Automatic parsing (splitting data into columns)
     Pandas automatically:
     Reads each line, Splits by delimiter (, by default),Organizes data into rows and columns
  2.Automatic data type inference
    Pandas intelligently guesses data types
  3.Automatic handling of missing values.

  THIS IS CONSIDERED THE GATEWAY because:
  - We stop thinking in terms of 'for loops' ie row by row thinking to column/vector operations(vectorization)
  - Large data sets easily handled
  - Introduces use of DataFrame
  - Scales conceptually to real systems.

This is how chatgpt summarized it for me and i find it easy to understand:
  The transition from manual data entry to using pd.read_csv() is pivotal because it 
  shifts the programmer from low-level file handling to high-level data analysis using 
  structured DataFrames. Pandas automatically performs three key operations: 
  (1) parsing the CSV into rows and columns, (2) inferring appropriate data types 
  such as integers, floats, and dates, and (3) handling missing values by representing 
  them as NaN. These tasks would otherwise require many lines of manual code in standard 
  Python. This transition is considered the gateway to big data because it introduces 
  efficient, vectorized operations, enables handling of large datasets, and builds the 
  foundational DataFrame abstraction used in advanced tools like SQL systems and distributed 
  frameworks such as Apache Spark and Hadoop.


Analyze the fundamental differences between the tabular (Flat) structure of CSV and the 
hierarchical (Nested) structure of JSON. Explain how 'nesting' allows JSON to represent complex relationships that a CSV cannot easily capture.
  => A CSV (Comma-Separated Values) file is 2-dimensional:
       - Rows is represented by records
       - Columns is represented by fields

Key limitation of CSV is that it can only represent one level of data, it faces challenges of
multiple values per field, relationships (one-to-many, many-to-many) and also nested objects.

JSON which is like Hierarchical (Nested) Structure:
  => It stores data as key-value pairs like objects{}, arrays[]
  e.g {
  "id": 1,
  "name": "Mary",
  "orders": [
    {"id": 101, "amount": 50},
    {"id": 102, "amount": 75}
  ]
}
 Nesting is putting objects inside other objects or arrays creating a tree-like structure not just rows and columns.
 {
  "customer": {
    "name": "Mary",
    "address": {
      "city": "Seattle",
      "zip": "98101"
    }
  }
}
DIFFERENCES:
CSV is mostly strings, rows and columns, simple, hard to represent, simple tables, spreadsheets
   WHEREAS
JSON is tree-like(hierarchical), complex, natural, supports (objects, arrays, numbers), is structured, used in APIs and web apps

Why CSV struggles with relationships
Example: with Json, it is easy and natural, can be one customer, multiple orders like below:
{
  "customer_id": 1,
  "name": "Mary",
  "orders": [
    {"order_id": 101, "amount": 50},
    {"order_id": 102, "amount": 75}
  ]
}
However, with CSV, it needs flattening first;
customer_id,name,order_id,amount
1,Mary,101,50
1,Mary,102,75,
problems that comes with it is duplicated data for example like 'Mary' in the above example, difficult to understand relationships,
larger file size and a higher risk of inconsistency.

How nesting solves real-world problems:
  - Through relationships like one-to-many, complex objects, mixed data types.

As seen, Json can store arrays,objects and also booleans which CSV can not, this makes it more powerful.
More advantages of Json
- Represents real-world relationships naturally
- No need for multiple tables
- Flexible schema
- Ideal for APIs and web data

SQLite advantages for local data analysis:
  - It is serverless unlike relational dbs, 
  The database engine runs directly inside the application process (e.g., inside Python script or Jupyter Notebook). When you call sqlite3.connect(), the code executing the SQL queries is part of the library itself, eliminating network overhead.
  - It runs on a single-File storage: 
  Portability: One can easily share their entire dataset with a colleague via email, Slack, or GitHub simply by sending the .db file and there is zero Configuration that is there are no user accounts, permissions, or network configurations to manage, creating a database is as simple as creating a file.
  - Dynamic and Flexible typing(Manifest typing)
  Most relational databases use rigid typing, where a column can only store data matching its declared type. SQLite uses manifest typing.
  Value-Based Storage: Datatypes are associated with the value itself, not the column. You can technically store text in an integer column, and SQLite won't complain.
  - Transactional Safety (ACID)
Even though it is lightweight, SQLite is fully ACID-compliant (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability).
Crash Resilience: It utilizes a rollback journal or Write-Ahead Log (WAL) to ensure that if your Python script crashes midway through writing a large batch of analytical data, the database file remains uncorrupted.
  - Because SQLite runs in-process, data transfer between the database and data analysis libraries like Pandas is exceptionally fast.